To ramble a little, this game's idea came to me slowly, over time I'd say, since the days I played Escape Velocity Nova. For those that never played the Escape Velocity series, they are 3 games released in the late 90's/early 00's that are basically Sid Meier's Pirates - in space. For those that never player Sid Meier's Pirates, what this means is that the EV games are a sandbox in a mostly fixed universe, where you are the captain of a spaceship. Space is represented top-down in 2D, and you can go from planets to planets buying weapons, ships, trading things, and so on.
I guess what really set EV apart, and particularly Nova - the only one I could really get into because the graphics were really quite good - was the story. EVN has a story to tell, and it was actually quite a lovely bit of a science-fiction mashup. None of the ideas were really new, but it all blended together really well to make a universe that felt real, alive, and perhaps more importantly, far far bigger than it really was. The sense of mystery was real.

But that wasn't the only thing that contributed to make it good. The other, possibly more important aspect in the end, was that the world of EV Nova quickly felt familiar. You could get to know it, and it was actually really rewarding. There were several more or less hidden/remote systems that allowed you to get special stuff, or discover a little new bit of trivia. That was a really important. You felt this bond develop with the universe of the game because you began to know it and its secrets, as time went on.
I guess this is one thing that several games missed, and I am going to point to No Man's Sky here, which is basically 100% the opposite approach.
It actually did not really hurt replayability because the core of the gameplay was really fun, so whenever you wanted to get back into it, you could just do a run with all the familiar elements still mostly there. And that was great. It was replayable because of the nostalgia aspect. Even today, if you asked me what my favorite ship was and why, I could probably write hundreds of lines. For the record, it's the Pirates Valkyrie Class IV with some more Ion cannons.



That'll allow me to get into something else: Escape Velocity, and Nova in particular, was easy, and generally terribly balanced. Ships had variants - basically the same sprite but weapons and characteristics varied. And some variants were really overpowered compared to the base version, in impossible ways. That made those ships far far better.
Why was this a good thing? Because the core gameplay was about having fun destroying stuff, and boy it was 100% on the mark. And having the biggest baddest ship because you knew which one to get and how to get it and just plow through everything was just great. That's actually one of the things I dislike the most about a recent FOSS clone of EVN, called Endless Sky (which I do recommend you check out, the gameplay itself is at least as good as EVN and it's really really fun), it's that you can't really overpower your ship all that much. To get something good, you have to get the biggest one. No way to get a completely OP fighter or really go too wacky on your ship setup. Nova gave you an insane amount of liberty, and allowed you to really play to your favorite style, even if the game offered rather limited overall options.

You know, you just felt like you could make the Millenium Falcon.

Anyways. Nova was excellent, I probably have more hours in it than… most other games. But it wasn't perfect. If the familiarity and mostly static (except for the storylines) universe was a strength, it was also a bit of a weakness: "runs" of the game tended to be short. You played for 20 hours, got the biggest baddest thing, and that was it for a few months. You couldn't go any higher.

Which is why I had this idea of making a game like EVN, but with some more dynamism thrown in. My biggest complaint with Nova, I'd say, was how static the universe was. Factions were supposed to be at war, but nothing ever changed. You could go and read the news about battles and stuff, but it was all senseless fluff.
The basic idea here is - what if it wasn't?



To go on another small tangent, I've always liked the idea of game in which you-the-player weren't the hero. A Zelda game where you're Link, but there's actually a bunch of other Link-dudes going around trying to save the princess. It's not that you can't be the hero, it's that you may not be the hero. You don't have to do everything. A Call of Duty were your AI pals could actually probably complete the mission even if you weren't a super soldier.
That's another thing I'd like to incorporate. If the universe if dynamic, that means other people could be doing hero-type stuff. We could develop a mythology around them and not you.

And here I'll reintroduce some EVN elements. That game had some permanent other characters going around in their ships. They didn't really do much but it was kind of fun to see some "known" names out in the open every now and then. It made it feel alive.
Well what if those people actually had events attached to them. What if the game said this guy helped in this battle that turned this system over to this government. Wouldn't that be so cool? And you could see him going around doing his things. Occasionally team up I guess. Read about it in the news.

You wouldn't need a lot of people, and it could be quite dynamic. Occasionally they would die and you would feel like you lost a friend, or something.

You might be thinking right now: isn't this basically describing a MMORPG? well, I don't think so. The problem with MMORPGs is that you have some very real cons-traits very quickly. The first is that human players can't really be too overpowered if you have a PVP element - and a space game like that would need a PVP element. You get grounded in realism. And that's a different kind of game. EVE Online is the perfect example: can it really be called a game anymore?
Another thing is that you would need to assign players to a mirror of the same universes and make it sort of big, otherwise you are always going to run into the same people in the same places, since pretty quickly all the players would know the good spots. And that's kind of immersion breaking. And well, truthfully, people don't really tell good stories, unless you really put a lot of time into it. That's not what I want.
You may also be thinking: isn't this also a lot like X3? A single player game with a huge space, a story aspect, but also a sandbox aspect. The thing is, X3 is not an arcade game, "immediate fun" game, kind of the opposite, in fact. It's to space games what Football Manager is to football. I want to make FIFA.



Another pitfall of space game is that space is pretty boring. It's mind-bogingly huge, and it's basically empty. That's just not fun. And this is something that the 2D in EVN or Endless Sky makes much easier to manage: you can just completely abstract away the size of stuff, planets become the size of on-screen ships and so on, which completely fixes the scale issue. Sid Meier's Pirates does the same thing with the Carribean.
But in a 3D space game, how do you handle this? You're kind of screwed. Scale needs to be more realistic. You need chokepoints, or it's always going to be empty. But how do you make those chokepoints feel natural and not arbitrary? That's a hard question to answer. Various games have adopted various solutions. In X3, these are the sectors, arbitrary rectangular bits of space with some stations there and hyperjumps. It's a pretty good answer because it uses the very problem to justify it: even in real life, humans would probably avoid 99.99% of space for the interesting areas. But it still feels a little artificial.
Galaxy On Fire 1 - not sure about 2 -, an iOS game that had a fair few similarities to a 3D EVN, made it so that going out "in space" could only be done for missions and other things with a purpose, which did work from a gameplay point of view but was kind of lame and not fun.
Rebel Galaxy actually made space 2D despite being a 3D game. And you know, it was good.
Hyperjumps add to the problem, because if you can just do it anywhere, you have no reason to clump with other spaceships. Most games thus use hyperjump "stations" or whatever.
The thing is, you don't just need chokepoints. You also need to let the player go to very remote areas of space on his own, if you want the "discovery" aspect of the game to work. That's one thing Escape Velocity Nova did really really well: it had quite a few remote, empty systems. And a lot of them had one random planet there, that you could land on, and get the description of a barren, icy, beautiful planet. And it felt special. It felt like discovering something.
You can't really do that with X3's system.

[Initial story:] So, 3D? Well, not. This game will be 2D, much like Nova, except with 3D graphics and a few goodies thrown in.
[Revised story:] After watching some Rebel Galaxy 2 footage, and running into issues with 2D (mostly >> you would constantly collide with other ships), I feel like 3D is doable. It needs some careful gameplay design, but with clever time boosting, it should be fun enough. NAEV has big empty spaces and remained fun.


There is a third big design issue that crops up in a lot of games and where I personally believe most games make the wrong decisions. It is the topic of simulation, or rather, simulating stuff. This can be a bit nebulous (ha), so I'll take an example to illustrate. Sim City 4 vs Cities Skylines. The first can have much much bigger cities than the second. There is a simple reason why: Sim City isn't actually simulating the people that live in the city, it's simulating the effects of having people live in a city. That allows it to handle a lot more data than Cities Skylines, where any car you see is actually one of the guys living in your city.
I believe most games should take the Sim City 4 approach for a few reason, keeping in mind that performance is very limiting. The CS approach does not actually improve the gameplay on the SC4 approach. Nothing that CS does can't be done with SC4. I'd go further: traffic (after some mods and expansions) in SC4 behaves in a better way than traffic in Cities Skylines. And what if you wanted to, say, click on a car in SC4 and see some more info? Well the truth is, there's really nothing that prevents the game from coming up with something on the fly, more or less. And it'd look pretty much identical.
Now this ends up being untrue after a certain extent, if you can simulate things well enough and fast enough, a full blown simulation is more realistic and slightly more entertaining, perhaps. Certainly technically more enticing and from a marketing point of view it's easier to sell. But I'm making a game here. Not a research simulation.
With all that in mind, the idea is to try and create stories dynamically. This is insanely hard to do right, but I believe I've found a framework (sort of similar to the Traits system of Crusader Kings II, but more developed) that would be able to work. At the moment of writing this, I haven't tried. Anyways. So to create stories dynamically, how can we use "fake" simulations to make the world function properly? I think the key will be to go back to the EVN concept of some permanent characters, and just generating others on the fly in the system. They too would have a background and a story to tell, but it'd only be a temporary one. Leave the system, and it's gone forever.
Of course, if the player particularly interact with one such "fake" character, there's really no reason not to turn them in a permanent one. One other game that does that (that I know of): Football Manager with the fake, greyed out players.


Moving on, there is the question of spaceships themselves. One of the good thing about 2D games is that you can see your ship, so the design is paramount. And EVN was absolutely stellar, ship-wise. Not only were the various designs really cool, the different factions had cohesive styles that felt natural, and the variations inside the factions did not feel too random. You had a bit of a choice, depending on your playstyle. And quite a few ships were ultimately viable, which allowed you to choose. The variants factored in on top of that to really give you some serious freedom.
So, yeah. 3rd person and optionally a top-down camera. Because why not.

In terms of design, the core idea would be to have shipyards with a defined style/personality, and then have the procedurally design spaceships. The trouble is that procedurally designing good looking spaceships with a lot of variety is a bit difficult. It also hurts the familiarity, so I think some designs should be "timeless" and always present, with minor iterations depending on fashions.